Psychotherapy May Help You Find Relief From Chronic Back Pain — Here's How
Back pain is one of the most common reasons why Americans over the age of 45 seek medical care. Sergey Filimonov/Stocksy
Chronic back pain impacts millions of Americans.
New research revealed that combining cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT) with tailored exercises could significantly support pain management.
CBT is designed to change the way individuals thought processes, focus, and attitudes.
The new findings highlight the importance of individualized treatment plans in treating chronic pain.
An ailment that can strike at any time, chronic back pain is one of the leading causes of disability. It contributes to everything from sleepless nights and depression to missed work and reduced income.

Painkillers and rest are two popular approaches taken to ease its symptoms. However, new research from Goethe University Frankfurt has revealed that combining tailored exercises with cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT) might be an optimal approach to treating chronic back pain.

The study analyzed data from 58 randomized control trials comprising over 10,000 individuals with chronic lower back pain. The researchers looked at the efficacy of three different treatment approaches, including standard exercise, individualized, and individualized care with CBT.

Standard exercise treatments comprise activities such as Pilates, while individualized care involves tailored exercises created with a medical professional, such as a physiotherapist. CBT, meanwhile, is a talking therapy designed to alter a person’s thoughts and behaviors.

What the findings revealed
Individualized care was found to be 38% more effective at reducing pain than standard exercise treatments, as it focuses more on the patient, their pain, and their needs.

However, when researchers looked at the impact of CBT and individualized care combined — known as a ‘multimodal approach’ — the benefits were remarkable: 84% higher than standard treatment alone.

Dr. Johannes Fleckenstein, from the Institute of Sports Sciences at Goethe University Frankfurt and co-author of the research, revealed the benefits were optimal in the shorter term (three months or less).

However, he noted, “at one year, effects can still be observed — [they are just] smaller. Pain and disability are still reduced compared to the initial level.”

One reason improvements may have declined? The data didn’t allow the researchers to see whether participants adhered to treatment — and consistency is critical.

“I am sure that effects are stronger in groups where a minimum level of counseling is obtained through the year or in patients that continued with CBT training,” Fleckenstein hypothesized.

The basics of chronic back pain
Before diving into CBT, let’s look at what chronic back pain involves.

“Back pain is one of the most common rea
